.. _sprop:

SProp (proof irrelevant propositions)
=====================================

.. warning::

   The status of strict propositions is experimental.

   In particular, conversion checking through bytecode or native code
   compilation currently does not understand proof irrelevance.

This section describes the extension of |Coq| with definitionally
proof irrelevant propositions (types in the sort :math:`\SProp`, also
known as strict propositions) as described in
:cite:`Gilbert:POPL2019`.

Use of |SProp| may be disabled by passing ``-disallow-sprop`` to the
|Coq| program or by turning the :flag:`Allow StrictProp` flag off.

.. flag:: Allow StrictProp
   :name: Allow StrictProp

   Enables or disables the use of |SProp|.  It is enabled by default.
   The command-line flag ``-disallow-sprop`` disables |SProp| at
   startup.

   .. exn:: SProp is disallowed because the "Allow StrictProp" flag is off.
      :undocumented:

Some of the definitions described in this document are available
through ``Coq.Logic.StrictProp``, which see.

Basic constructs
----------------

The purpose of :math:`\SProp` is to provide types where all elements
are convertible:

.. coqtop:: all

   Theorem irrelevance (A : SProp) (P : A -> Prop) : forall x : A, P x -> forall y : A, P y.
   Proof.
   intros * Hx *.
   exact Hx.
   Qed.

Since we have definitional :ref:`eta-expansion` for
functions, the property of being a type of definitionally irrelevant
values is impredicative, and so is :math:`\SProp`:

.. coqtop:: all

   Check fun (A:Type) (B:A -> SProp) => (forall x:A, B x) : SProp.

In order to keep conversion tractable, cumulativity for :math:`\SProp`
is forbidden, unless the :flag:`Cumulative StrictProp` flag is turned
on:

.. coqtop:: all

   Fail Check (fun (A:SProp) => A : Type).
   Set Cumulative StrictProp.
   Check (fun (A:SProp) => A : Type).

.. coqtop:: none

   Unset Cumulative StrictProp.

We can explicitly lift strict propositions into the relevant world by
using a wrapping inductive type. The inductive stops definitional
proof irrelevance from escaping.

.. coqtop:: in

   Inductive Box (A:SProp) : Prop := box : A -> Box A.
   Arguments box {_} _.

.. coqtop:: all

   Fail Check fun (A:SProp) (x y : Box A) => eq_refl : x = y.

.. doesn't get merged with the above if coqdoc
.. coqtop:: in

   Definition box_irrelevant (A:SProp) (x y : Box A) : x = y
     := match x, y with box x, box y => eq_refl end.

In the other direction, we can use impredicativity to "squash" a
relevant type, making an irrelevant approximation.

.. coqdoc::

  Definition iSquash (A:Type) : SProp
    := forall P : SProp, (A -> P) -> P.
  Definition isquash A : A -> iSquash A
    := fun a P f => f a.
  Definition iSquash_sind A (P : iSquash A -> SProp) (H : forall x : A, P (isquash A x))
    : forall x : iSquash A, P x
    := fun x => x (P x) (H : A -> P x).

Or more conveniently (but equivalently)

.. coqdoc::

  Inductive Squash (A:Type) : SProp := squash : A -> Squash A.

Most inductives types defined in :math:`\SProp` are squashed types,
i.e. they can only be eliminated to construct proofs of other strict
propositions. Empty types are the only exception.

.. coqtop:: in

   Inductive sEmpty : SProp := .

.. coqtop:: all

   Check sEmpty_rect.

.. note::

   Eliminators to strict propositions are called ``foo_sind``, in the
   same way that eliminators to propositions are called ``foo_ind``.

Primitive records in :math:`\SProp` are allowed when fields are strict
propositions, for instance:

.. coqtop:: in

   Set Primitive Projections.
   Record sProd (A B : SProp) : SProp := { sfst : A; ssnd : B }.

On the other hand, to avoid having definitionally irrelevant types in
non-:math:`\SProp` sorts (through record Î·-extensionality), primitive
records in relevant sorts must have at least one relevant field.

.. coqtop:: all

   Set Warnings "+non-primitive-record".
   Fail Record rBox (A:SProp) : Prop := rbox { runbox : A }.

.. coqdoc::

   Record ssig (A:Type) (P:A -> SProp) : Type := { spr1 : A; spr2 : P spr1 }.

Note that ``rBox`` works as an emulated record, which is equivalent to
the Box inductive.

Encodings for strict propositions
---------------------------------

The elimination for unit types can be encoded by a trivial function
thanks to proof irrelevance:

.. coqdoc::

   Inductive sUnit : SProp := stt.
   Definition sUnit_rect (P:sUnit->Type) (v:P stt) (x:sUnit) : P x := v.

By using empty and unit types as base values, we can encode other
strict propositions. For instance:

.. coqdoc::

  Definition is_true (b:bool) : SProp := if b then sUnit else sEmpty.

  Definition is_true_eq_true b : is_true b -> true = b
    := match b with
       | true => fun _ => eq_refl
       | false => sEmpty_ind _
       end.

  Definition eq_true_is_true b (H:true=b) : is_true b
    := match H in _ = x return is_true x with eq_refl => stt end.

Issues with non-cumulativity
----------------------------

During normal term elaboration, we don't always know that a type is a
strict proposition early enough. For instance:

.. coqdoc::

   Definition constant_0 : ?[T] -> nat := fun _ : sUnit => 0.

While checking the type of the constant, we only know that ``?[T]``
must inhabit some sort. Putting it in some floating universe ``u``
would disallow instantiating it by ``sUnit : SProp``.

In order to make the system usable without having to annotate every
instance of :math:`\SProp`, we consider :math:`\SProp` to be a subtype
of every universe during elaboration (i.e. outside the kernel). Then
once we have a fully elaborated term it is sent to the kernel which
will check that we didn't actually need cumulativity of :math:`\SProp`
(in the example above, ``u`` doesn't appear in the final term).

This means that some errors will be delayed until ``Qed``:

.. coqtop:: in

   Lemma foo : Prop.
   Proof. pose (fun A : SProp => A : Type); exact True.

.. coqtop:: all

   Fail Qed.

.. coqtop:: in

   Abort.

.. flag:: Elaboration StrictProp Cumulativity
   :name: Elaboration StrictProp Cumulativity

   Unset this flag (it is on by default) to be strict with regard to
   :math:`\SProp` cumulativity during elaboration.

The implementation of proof irrelevance uses inferred "relevance"
marks on binders to determine which variables are irrelevant. Together
with non-cumulativity this allows us to avoid retyping during
conversion. However during elaboration cumulativity is allowed and so
the algorithm may miss some irrelevance:

.. coqtop:: all

  Fail Definition late_mark := fun (A:SProp) (P:A -> Prop) x y (v:P x) => v : P y.

The binders for ``x`` and ``y`` are created before their type is known
to be ``A``, so they're not marked irrelevant. This can be avoided
with sufficient annotation of binders (see ``irrelevance`` at the
beginning of this chapter) or by bypassing the conversion check in
tactics.

.. coqdoc::

   Definition late_mark := fun (A:SProp) (P:A -> Prop) x y (v:P x) =>
     ltac:(exact_no_check v) : P y.

The kernel will re-infer the marks on the fully elaborated term, and
so correctly converts ``x`` and ``y``.

.. warn:: Bad relevance

  This is a developer warning, disabled by default. It is emitted by
  the kernel when it is passed a term with incorrect relevance marks.
  To avoid conversion issues as in ``late_mark`` you may wish to use
  it to find when your tactics are producing incorrect marks.

.. flag:: Cumulative StrictProp
   :name: Cumulative StrictProp

   Set this flag (it is off by default) to make the kernel accept
   cumulativity between |SProp| and other universes. This makes
   typechecking incomplete.
